okay good morning everybody thanks for
breathing the cold this morning um let's
dive right back in just a reminder about
uh assignments undergrads you're working
on adding Motors to your robot in
assignment five grad students you're
completing the ninth and then the final
assignment uh in the original round of
assignments and then as promised next
Tuesday Morning graduate students who
will start in on the first of the
different enable robotics design uh
assignments and I will talk briefly
about what those are on Tuesday question
are your office hours be on
Monday what's on what's happening on
Monday I can never keep
track president stay uh yes I believe I
will be available I may not be here it
may be remote but I'll make a note yes
to office hours uh on Monday my
apologies to US
presidents okay
any other
questions all good okay so uh just to
reorient you as to where we are in the
lecture material we finished lecture
seven last time hopefully for you on a
high note where we looked at this
particular evolved neural network that
is able to distinguish between triangles
and rectangles with no triangle detector
no rectangle detector detectable in
inside the neural network the way in
which it's able to exhibit this
particular building block of
intelligence which is being able to
distinguish certain things from others
is a function of the way this thing
moves its interaction with the
environment its ability to remember past
sensation timing space you name it it
all brings it together in order to solve
the problem we cannot
localize this particular building block
of intelligence which is categorization
to anywhere inside the brain or the body
of the robot this slide if you forget
what embodied cognition is all about
bookmark this slide and come back to it
as we go okay any questions about any of
that from last time okay so that
finished uh our introduction of the
first two assignments uh the first two
assignments the first two experiments
that kicked off the field of
evolutionary robotics in the '90s
uh we're now going to dive into lectures
eight and nine where we're going to look
at a series of minimal cognition
experiments these also took place at the
beginning uh of the
field and the idea behind the minimal
cognition experiments was to strip away
as much of the complexity of the robot's
body its brain and its environment as
possible so that we'd have a minimal
environment minimal robot minimal robot
brain and in sec sequence investigate or
evolve into that robot various building
blocks of
intelligence you might remember from
lecture two in our history of AI decades
were spent and are still being spent
trying to Define what intelligence is is
chat GPT intelligent or not I don't know
it depends on your definition of
intelligence so as you'll see in the
minimal cognition experiments a
different tack is taken in the attempt
to try and create intelligent machines
it which is to identify certain features
of intelligent Behavior or certain
features of behavior that you would
expect to see in an intelligent machine
regardless of whether that's a
biological machine or a technological
machine what do you think some of those
building blocks of intelligence might
be we just mention mentioned one of them
for the Gantry robot which is
categorization tell triangles from
rectangles friend from fo food from
poison um potential mate from aggressor
so on and so forth if you want to
survive in this world you need to be
able to distinguish between A and B
that's a building block of intelligence
some equivalent ability to act in the
world to push on the world okay so to
act on the world and observe how it
pushes back so that would include all
the brenberg vehicles yeah that's
probably a building block of
intelligence would be a little bit more
specific
you're all intelligent machines you can
categorize what else sorry commun
communication great we're not going to
see that in the minimal cognition
experiments but we are going to see it
when we get to uh Collective robotics
but absolutely being able to communicate
with your peers other potential building
blocks of
intelligence able react to your envir
being able to react to your environment
see what's coming in and decide what to
do
planning planning being able to think
ahead a really important Hallmark of
intelligence is not getting trapped in a
corner in the future to keep your
options open right a building block of
intelligence that that's the idea we're
going to see we may or may not get to
lecture nine today in the minimal
cognition experiments we're going to see
the evolution of very very simple robots
that are able to exhibit more and more
of these building blocks of int Ence at
which point you want to point to that
evolved robot and say now it's
intelligent now it's thinking now it
understands now it has free will now it
has Consciousness that's up to you we're
going to approach approach this in a
very operational way the robot should be
able to behave in this way and that way
and that way and that way and so on yeah
okay before we get there however in the
minimal cognition experiments all of the
robots in the minimal cognition
experiments use a particular kind of
neural Neal network controller which is
known as a ctrnn so we're going to spend
some time this morning looking at this
particular type of neural network and as
you'll see when we talk about CTI and NS
CTI and NS make it easier for The
evolutionary algorithm to evolve
intelligent building blocks for the
robots the neural networks that we've
been talking about so far are very very
very simple they go back to our brenberg
vehicles we have circles representing uh
biological neurons and our arrows are
representing biological synapses we
figure out how to wire up the sensor
neurons to the motor neurons we might
throw some hidden neurons in the middle
once we wired everything up we need one
number for each
synapse which is the weight of influence
that that press synaptic neuron has on
that post synaptic neuron and then we
also need an activation function for our
uh are hidden and motor neurons because
the raw sum arriving at that neuron may
be outside some bound and our activation
function is going to squash that value
back to some range and then possibly
pass that value on as you can imagine
this is a gross simplification of how
actual biological neurons and synapses
work so within Robotics and Ai and
computational Neuroscience there is a a
very large community
Community that's interested in creating
a more accurate model of biological
neural networks and then investigating
whether and how that additional
biological detail makes it easier for us
to make intelligent machines we're going
to do a little bit of that in lectures
eight and nine we're going to look at
CER and NS which include some additional
biological details into these neural
networks and then we're going to see in
in lecture 9 how that makes it easier
for The evolutionary algorithm to evolve
intelligent behavior for robots
controlled by cnns sound good okay
that's our preview for what we're doing
in the next two lectures all right here
we
go uh cnns stands for continuous time
recurrent neural networks and we're
going to tackle each noun and adjective
in this name as we go in order to do so
we're going to need to do a little bit
of calculus deep breath this is the only
place in the course for the
undergraduates where you're going to
have to do a little bit of calculus for
The Graduate students that are going to
be tackling the differentiable robot
design you're going to see calculus uh
again we're not going to do too much
calculus so just to remember what
calculus actually is turns out for a lot
of branches of science and engineering
and for robotics we often want to be
able to describe how how a particular
variable changes as a function of
another variable here's arguably the
simplest experiment example of this
we've got one variable here x and we've
got one variable y here and as you can
see from this line here as X changes I
changes in exactly the same way right
this is Y equals X in calculus what we
often want to do is describe at a
particular point for this variable we
want to be able to explain how Y is
changing at exactly that point so what
is the delta in y as the Delta of X
becomes smaller and smaller and smaller
and hopefully this is reminding you of
your first year Calculus class where it
gets exceedingly difficult until it
becomes infinitely difficult when Delta
X becomes zero so way back in the day uh
some folks invented this idea of
calculus which is a way to describe
instantaneous change of one variable y
as a function of X and that's what's
written down here and my apologies I've
switched from variables X and Y to x and
t this is a little bit confusing so I
should really update this slide on the
horizontal axis here we're going to
assume that the variable we're
interested in is T for time we're going
to see in continuous time recurrent
neural networks how the values of
neurons change as a function of
time so we've got T on the horizontal
axis here and X on the horizontal axis
here and DX overt tells us that we're
going to write down on the right hand
side of this equal sign how X changes
where X is going to be in a moment X is
going to be the value of the neuron how
does the value of the neuron change as a
function of time in my super cartoony
example here DX over TT equals
1 this is a differentiable sorry a
differential equation we're going to see
a bunch of differential equations this
morning what you're doing at the moment
in your neural networks if you've gotten
that that far is actually to use
difference equations we write the value
of a neuron at a new time Step at time t
+ one as a function of the old value of
the neuron plus some other
stuff we can try and write down how this
function changes as a function of sorry
how this variable changes as a function
of this variable we can try and write it
down as a difference equation where
we've got discrete time steps which is
what we usually have in a physics engine
or we can write down how this variable
changes as a function of this one in a
continuous manner using a different
differential
equation okay the rate of change of X
what this equation says is the rate of
change in X is equal to the rate of
change of
T familiar to everybody so far so good
all right okay okay so the con CER and
NS The Continuous time is because we're
going to write down and describe the
behavior of these neurons not in
discreet time we're going to write down
down the behavior of these neurons as
differential equations so we're going to
describe and simulate the behavior of
these neurons in continuous time that's
the CT and C CTR rnns what about the
recurrent part this should be familiar
we've already talked about recurrence in
neural
networks that
connect they are yes so we have we're
going to have in curn ends as we'll see
in a moment recurrent synapses that can
connect from the output back to the
input or from the output back to the
hidden they're kind of flowing instead
of flowing from Sensation to Motors and
actions they flow backwards which
creates a loop and allows the robot to
hold on and reme or allows the neural
network to hold on and remember
stuff okay okay so in a in a CNN we are
going to write down a set of ordinary
differential equations where we if we
have a set of K ordinary differential
equations those represent the behaviors
of the K neurons inside the
ctrnn if we have a ctrn with 28 neurons
we're going to write down a set of 28
ordinary differential equations so
things are already getting more
complicated compared to the traditional
neural networks you're familiar
with okay you see a big red box here I I
highly encourage you to write down these
equations as we go as you all know if
you just sit and stare at equations they
don't soak in so I invite you to write
along with me as we build out one of
these differential equations uh as
you'll see I've spaced out where to add
the terms because we're going to add
detail to this differential equation as
we go so leave space as you annotate
this okay so let's start with the left
hand side of the equal sign we've got y
sub I prime so the prime is just going
to remind this is shorthand for dy over
DT so we're going to describe and I'm
sorry I keep switching back and forth
between variable
names typically Y is used in all the
papers that describe
cnns y sub I is going to represent the
value of the I neuron in the
ctrnn we're I'm not going to have you
write down 28 differential equations
it's a waste of time so we're just going
to write down y sub I to REM to remind
us that this particular differential
equation that we're going to build up is
the differentiable uh the differential
equation describing the behavior of the
ith neuron in the
ctrnn okay all right let's start by
placing minus y subi to the right of
this differential differential
equation why would we add this
particular term does anybody have any
Neuroscience experiment this particular
term is
representing a particular behavior of
biological
neurons anybody see yet what it
is Nate simulate
spiking uh good question question so you
mentioned spiking so for those that are
not familiar with the behavior of
neurons they tend to emit a spike or a
pulse of electricity and then they go
quiet again and it's often the the uh
the distance or the bunching up of these
spikes that is representing the
information that one neuron is sending
to another CNS are not simulating that
particular detail of neurons there are
other neural Network models that do
represent spiking this is not one of
them is it like a w or uh not
quite
Emily okay like damping ah damping we're
getting close okay let's actually try
and draw a geometric representation of
what this differenti differentiable this
differential equation is doing as you
may remember when you're going to
simulate or integrate a differential
equation you need to give it an initial
value so let's imagine we have a single
neuron in our CNN and so we've got the
value of this neuron at the beginning of
us simulating this neuron we need to set
it to some value we can imagine that
this single neuron is sitting inside of
a brenberg vehicle and it's connected to
a sensor and that sensor is supplying a
value of plus one let's say just
hypothetically so the neuron is
receiving a value of one and then this
differential equation is going to
describe how the value of this neuron
changes assuming it doesn't receive any
more input this is just a hypothetical
situation if the current value
of the neuron is Plus 1 at t equal 0
what happens as time starts to move
forward what happens as dy over DT D
starts to increase if our differential
equation is saying the rate of change of
Y with respect to T is decreasing as a
function of the current value of y what
starts happening approaches zero it
approaches zero so if we move some
arbitrary distance forward and remember
our differential equation is operating
in continuous time so we can just pick
some arbitrary point in time as T
increases the rate of change of Y
decreases as a function of this so we
can take this value of plus one and plug
it in here and say the rate of change at
this moment is minus one so the value
starts to decrease let's imagine that
this particular point in time the new
value of the neuron
is8 tell me about the new value of the
neuron as we continue to move forward in
time now it's like decreasing something
less it's decreasing at a lower rate
right y Prime equals
minus8 the rate of decrease was one now
the rate of decrease is minus 8 so now
it's maybe
7 7 and as Nate says if we keep going
the neuron will start to approach a
value of zero we plug in a value of one
we excite the neuron with a value of one
and then we stop exciting the neuron and
what does the neuron do it relaxes back
to zero what feature of neurons are we
simulating by adding this term to our
differential
equation
is it inhibition it's not quite
inhibition so we don't have any we don't
have neurons connected together yet in
our hypothetical CN we have one neuron
no synapses so nothing's inhibiting
anything else we just have this single
neuron let's try another example let's
take the exact same cin n one neuron
which is being simulated by this
differential equation and now we assume
that at a particular point in time it
receives a value of minus one some
sensor that this neuron is connected to
sends a signal of minus one and then the
sensor shuts off the neuron doesn't get
any more external stimulation what does
this what does the neurons start to do
now as we run forward in time from this
event again absolutely so so it's minus1
the rate of change uh the rate of change
of Y is equal to
minus minus1 the current value of y so
the rate of change at this moment in
time is plus
one so in a short time later we've got a
value of
minus8 at this moment in time we plug
that value of y sub I in and we get the
rate of change of Y is equal to minus
minus8 so the rate of change of Y at
this moment in time is Plus 8 it's
increasing by a slightly lesser amount
and this neuron starts to approach zero
what about this initial value or this
initial value or this this this this
this this what happens in all of these
cases they all go towards
zero this is rep uh Emily yes
uh resting membrane potential the the
first adjective is right the resting one
of the things that neurons are above all
else is
lazy given the fact that nothing else is
going on they will slowly relax back to
resting potential or using as little
oxygen as possible your brain is about
2% of your total mass but it uses up 20
20% of all the oxygen you breathe and
everything you eat brains are massive
energy Hogs it makes very good sense for
neurons when they're quote unquote not
needed for anything to relax back to a
low energy State that's what this
particular term in the differential
equation is
doing as we continue to go through and
add material add bi add mathematical
detail to how these neurons are behaving
we're adding in additional biological
details of how actual biological neurons
work so far so good so everyone can see
the correspondence between this equation
and our simulation of how this neuron
behaves okay all right let's add in an
additional
detail a neuron that will just relax to
zero uh if it's not stimulated never
useful for
anything we're going to add in an
additional term here which is a time
constant so this is to subi the subi is
there to remind us that we actually have
K ordinary differential equations for
each of the K neurons in the CTI andn so
each neuron has its own time constant
it's called a constant because it means
that throughout the simulation of the
ctrnn this value is not changing we're
going to set it y changes as we simulate
a neuron but the time constant does not
is that like a parameter you set before
it's a parameter not you set as you
might Guess The evolutionary algorithm
is going to start setting these
parameters so as we build up this
ordinary differential equation there's
going to be a mixture of variables which
are the things that are simulated and
change over time and a set of parameters
which The evolutionary algorithm is
going to try and set it's going to try
and find good settings for these
parameters to get the robot that's
equipped with that CNN to do whatever it
is we want the robot to do like we've
seen before so far so good okay you may
or may not have seen this before um this
is putting obviously a parameter on the
left hand side of a differential
equation usually we put everything on
the right hand side um we could do that
by dividing both sides of the O the
differential equation by T sub I and now
we've got a right minus y subi divided
by too not only are these neurons lazy
but the people that created cnns are
lazy and didn't want to bother writing
out everything as a fraction so they
just put it on the left hand side so
everything fits nicely on one line this
is just kind of a notation thing yeah if
you feel uncomfortable about looking at
this with stuff on the left hand side
you can mentally divide both sides by
tal
subi okay let's imagine let's keep
things simple let's assume that our time
constants are going to be positive
values we can set them to anything
.001 we can set them to 10 to the 8
anything any floating point value that's
a positive
number what does a neuron with a low
time constant do let's assume that the
time constant is set to something very
very close to zero
.001 how does that neuron behave comp
compared to this
neuron
it
longer more quickly approaches zero okay
one of those two statements is correct
we still have minus y sub I so this
thing is still lazy if it's not being
stimulated it whatever its value is
it'll gradually Decay back to zero to
rest with the low time constant does it
approach that asmode quick
or
slowly
thinker correct so let's go through this
we're setting talsa by let's set it
equal
to
0.01 all right just so you fix a number
in your
head multiply both sides of the ordinary
differential equation by
001 and we've got y Prime = - y /
001 so suddenly EV everything that we
compute on the right hand side tends to
be a very very big number which means
the rate of
change is Big right so if we go back to
our example of setting a value of y to
one and then not stimulating that neuron
anymore we've got on the right hand side
minus 1 divided
001 and we've got a huge negative number
right the slope at this point is now
very precipitous it's dropping so boom
down goes the value of the neuron to
0.02 now we want to keep simulating the
behavior of this neuron As Time
increases so we plug in on the right
hand side minus. 2 /
.001
boom what's
happened absolutely so we've overshot by
let's say minus
0.1 we've overshot now what
happens it goes up if we plug in uh
minus minus1 on the right hand side we
have plus 0.1 divided plus
0.01 we've got a precipitous increase
what does this particular neuron
do absolutely it's still asically
approaching zero it's still trying to
get to rest but it's continuously
overshooting and oscillating this is
known as the Woody
Allen neuron it's neurotic any little
stimulation and it goes absolutely
bananas it's depressed it's super
related it's all over the place it's
very very
sensitive you you can do this hopefully
now in your head you can simulate this
same Woody Allen neuron Now with an
initial value of minus 01 what does it
do same thing it's all over the place
okay let's imagine a different uh neuron
where everything's exactly the same
we're going to set its initial value to
plus one now we're going to set a very
high time
constant 10 to the 8 let's
say what is this neuron do if its
initial value is plus one
approaches very very slowly it
approaches very
slowly we plug in plus one on the right
hand side so we have minus + 1
-.1 / 10 8 is
-001 a slope like
this if we start with a value of minus1
what is the neuron with a very high time
constant
du same thing
right very very slowly approaching
rest everybody remember Eeyore from
Winnie the Poo very chill individual
very happy to just not do anything you
can prod Eeyore with immense strength
and it'll take quite a bit to get Eeyore
moving and even when Eeyore starts
moving he doesn't move very quickly yeah
very very resistant to external
perturbation yeah okay let's keep going
oh I forgot to mention we've added this
time constant this is also true of
different uh neurons in your brain
certain neur neurons are very sensitive
and they will start emitting spikes with
the the least provation they're very
very sensitive and they will react to
the the smallest provocation there are
other eore neurons in various parts of
your brain and spinal cord that take
quite a bit of external electrical
stimulation in order to start emitting
spikes so again as we go we're adding
biological detail here so far so good
okay let's keep going this part
hopefully looks somewhat familiar to you
we are now adding to the right hand side
of our ordinary differential equation a
summation
term as we compute the value of the ith
neuron at any point in time we are
visiting plus uh uppercase n uh other
neurons in the CNN and pulling out their
values and multiplying their values by
the weight that connects that neuron the
jth neuron to I the neurons value that
we're currently
Computing okay so again we have a whole
bunch of Odes ordinary differential
equations in our set here that are
simulating all these other neurons so as
we move forward we're going to assume
now in our hypothetical ctrnn that we
don't have just one neuron we have
uppercase n neurons and we have
uppercase n differential equations we're
just looking at one of them so far so
good okay here's where the recurrent
part of cnns comes in you'll notice that
as we iterate from one to uppercase n
we're not skipping over any values in
the uppercase n neurons which means as
we're Computing the summation at some
point as J is increasing from one to
uppercase n J hits I it's the neuron is
taking its own value and multiplying its
own value by the weight that connects it
to itself there's a particular type of
recurrent connection which is a self
connection Okay so we've been drawing
we've been drawing uh neural networks so
far in a layered Manner and this is
typically how neural networks are drawn
in our case for robotics we have a a
sensor a set of sensor neurons then we
have a bunch of hidden neurons and then
we have a bunch of motor neurons um as
you'll see if you look at any of the
Publications about CN ns cnns are not
drawn in that way the neurons are
arranged in a
circle and every neuron is connected by
a synapse to every other
neuron including
itself okay so in my cartoon example
here we've got uppercase n equals 6
neurons how many synapses do we
have we've got six neurons we've got six
differential equations we've got six
time constants one time constant for
each if this is one 2 3 four five six
neurons we've got T sub one t sub 2
maybe this is a Woody Allen neuron maybe
this is an eore neuron maybe this one
has some intermediate time constant
which means it's not too sensitive not
too uh not too
fmatic how many synapses do we
have 36 36 right so they're all
contained in let's say a matrix a 6x6
Matrix so so far if we were to deploy
this neural network into a robot The
evolutionary algorithm needs a genotype
that contains 36 numbers the 36 weights
plus the six towel constants The
evolutionary algorithm can tune the
reactivity of the neurons and how the
neurons influence one another so far so
good we'll keep things simple and assume
that time constants are positive numbers
and weights can be negative
or positive numbers negative weights as
you'll remember create inhibitory
connections and positive synaptic
weights create excitatory connections so
far so good okay here's something that
again hopefully is familiar we're adding
our activation function which squashes
the value of a neuron to some range in C
tier and NS the activation function
that's usually used is hyperbolic
tangent which will take any values and
squash them to a value between minus one
and one for our purposes it doesn't
really matter what this particular
activation function is what is of
interest to us is you'll notice that the
activation function is placed in an odd
place in the
equation it's kind of inside this
summation term anybody have any
intuition for why they're putting it
there when ites from neurons
ising that is true yeah that is a true
detail of biological neural
networks that that doesn't dictate why
they're putting the activation function
in
here so I guess the alternative to that
be to apply it whenever you're
calculating the value of the neuron
which means all the intermediate values
are going to be in that fix range yeah
so by not doing that you're allowing the
neuron values to stay in a broad range
you only normalize them when you're
combining them that's it exactly so by
putting it by putting the activation
function in here inside the neuron
itself if we were to look inside the
value of that neuron can range greatly
but the moment we read sorry let's add a
connection going from this neuron to
this neuron the moment we read out the
value of the JF neuron the minute we
read out that value because we're going
to take the value of that neuron and
multiply it by the weight for it to
influence the eyth neuron the moment we
read out that value at that moment of
readout bang that's when we apply the
activation function so that the value
that's coming out of here is always
guaranteed to be a value between minus1
and + one all these other pieces that
simulate the behavior of the neuron
might cause that neuron to take on very
high magnitude negative numbers or very
high magnitude positive numbers no
problem fine whatever the neuron does
behind closed doors that's fine when we
need it to influence something Beyond
its own borders then we squash it that's
why the activation function is put in
here so far so
good
okay in the ctrnn we have yet another uh
parameter associated with each neuron
which is G the gain of the neuron if we
have six neurons and six differential
equations we have six G's the gain for
each neuron you can see that the gain is
placed right inside this activation
function right next to the raw internal
value of the
neuron what is the gain parameter doing
the very name of this parameter kind of
is a very strong
hint just a straight multiplier it's a
straight multiplier that's what this
equation is telling us but what is that
multiplication
representing
conne uh you said a strengthened
connection between the neuron it's not
actually the gain is not being applied
to W which is the connection between
Pairs of neurons the gain is being
applied directly to the neurons
value what is this representing like how
well the neuron consense how well the
neuron consense it's not in the incoming
value of the neuron we have the value
the raw internal value of the neuron and
then we're multiplying it by G and again
we're going to add all these G's to the
genotype of an evolutionary algorithm
that's going to be evolving the behavior
of these neurons is it the strength of
the signal strength of the signal it's
literally the gain imagine a neuron that
has a g of zero what is that due to the
neuron is it a constant or do it's uh
it's not a constant it's a parameter so
but it stays constant throughout the
simulation of the neuron just like the
time constant as well sorry this yeah
this's a little bit of confusion about
terminology it stays constant during the
simulation of the neural network but
over evolutionary time Evolution might
change G's and
tals great question what's the
difference between
gain and synaptic weight
here the gain is like quiet neurons
verus loud neurons and the wave is how
much each neur listening to the other a
absolutely so let's go through this
let's imagine let's go back to assuming
we're looking at a particular neuron in
the CNN and this neuron has a gain of
zero it's also connected to all the
other neurons
if this neuron has a gain of zero what
does that
meaning it you're you're just it's gone
it's as if it's not there a gain of zero
is literally silencing that neuron it
doesn't matter how strong the weights of
connection are this is the difference
this neuron might be wired up to this
other one with a very strong weight of
influence but this neuron can just it's
muffled it can never speak anytime
anyone asks for a value of y subj if
we're Computing the value of the ith
neuron and we're Computing the right
hand side of this differential equation
and we get to the jth neuron we're
multiplying it by zero it's as if it's
not there yeah so as someone was just
saying gain is like the volume if
evolution over evolutionary time is
altering the G's of the neurons it's
changing the volume of these neurons it
can turn down the volume or the gain of
some of these neurons to zero and in
essence remove them from influencing
anything else it can also increase gain
and make that neuron very loud even with
very
small uh even with very small influences
if this neuron is very loud it's going
to tend to increase its influence on
everybody
else now Evolution could set all of the
outgoing could set all of the outgoing
synapses of a particular neuron to zero
and that would be another way to shut up
the
neuron but Evolution's got to come up
with mutations that bring all of these
to zero the gains are basically like uh
giving the evolutionary algorithm a
shortcut if for whatever reason it's
useful for evolution to turn off or
silence or alternatively to turn up the
volume or the overall influence of
particular neurons it's easier for
evolution to do it because it just needs
to change one number the gain for that
neuron as opposed to changing uppercase
n numbers the weights of all of the
uppercase n outgoing synapses from that
neuron so far so
good okay almost almost done
Theta subj we're going to throw in
another six numbers we're going to throw
in a Theta for each neuron in the
differential
equation what is bias do what does high
bias do what does low bias
do could beely is it
basically it absolutely is so different
value bias represents the fact that
biological neurons have different
resting potential so when we started
draw way back drawing the behavior of Y
we were seeing the value of the neuron
always dropping back to a resting value
of zero that's not true in practice
different bio different neurons in your
brain and your spinal cord if they're
not being influenced by things from
outside they will drop back to a certain
rate of emitting spikes or basically a a
rate of activity which is actually not
so restful for the neuron it's got to
burn oxygen in order to do that for
whatever reason that seems to be a
useful thing in biological machines it
makes sense for different neurons if
they're not being stimulated to start to
rest at different positive values or
different negative
values for whatever reason my
understanding and reading of the neuro
uh biology literature is still not quite
known why that's the case but it is so
they threw it
in okay let's just take a breath to
review everything we've seen here we've
got variables in this equation which are
all the Y's these are all our variables
we have a fixed function the activation
function and then we've got a whole
bunch of parameters TOS W's G's and
fetas if we have a CNN with six neurons
and they six ordinary differential
equations what is the length of a
genotype that encodes values for all of
these
parameters little bit of arithmetic this
morning we're checking our intuition
that we understand how all these pieces
fit
together how many towels do we
have six we got six tows how many W's do
we
have 36 right we've got six neurons and
every neuron is connected to every other
neuron including itself so this neuron
has six outgoing weights uh out six
outgoing synapses another six outgoing
synapses another six 6 12 18
24 uh 30 36 total synapses so 6 + 36 42
an auspicious
number how many G's do we have six six
so we got a total of 48 parameters
plus plus six biases I lost count now
what are we at 54 so a six neuron ctrnn
has 54 total uh parameters that need to
go into the genotype if we take a random
set of 54 floating Point values and
assign that to the CNN those neurons are
going to start those six neurons are
going to start changing values in a
particular
way if we take a different set of 54
floating Point values and download that
onto our six neurons CNN those neurons
are going to start changing in a
different way
yeah The evolutionary algorithm is
downloading one set of 54 values after
the other onto the CNN as we're going to
see in a few moments that CNN is
controlling a robot the robot does
something Evolution deletes the set of
54 parameters that cause the robot to do
poorly at whatever we want the robot to
do and The evolutionary algorithm makes
randomly modified copies of the length
54 Vector that caused the robot to do a
little bit better at whatever we wanted
to do and rinse and repeat that part is
familiar we've seen that before so far
so good okay last piece horrible
notation this time it's not my fault
this is uh uppercase eye sub lowercase i
for the mathematicians in the room my
apologies on behalf of the authors of
cets okay this additional term tacked on
to the end is meant to represent the
input that's coming into the ctrnn from
outside when we started our discussion
of CNS this morning I said imagine that
a neuron is set to some particular value
at a given point in time we're going to
drop these cnns into robots and connect
the robot sensors to some of the neurons
in the ctrnn so we've got our six we've
got our six neuron C tier andn here
let's assume that four of them are
connected to four sensors sorry this is
getting a little
messy we're going to connect we're going
to assume we're going to drop our six
neuron ctrnn into a robot that has four
sensors and I'll just draw them as
squares to distinguish them from neurons
we've got four
sensors we could imagine that these are
touch sensors so they're binary sensors
that are either sending minus1 or + one
into the ordinary differential equation
for that neuron so if we have six
neurons like this we have six ordinary
differential equations two of those six
ordinary differential equations are
missing this term they just don't have
it the other four uh differential
equations each have this term and they
are receiving or that neuron is
receiving the value of the neur that
neuron the value of that sensor at that
time step is tacked onto the end of the
differential equation and obviously
influences not the value of the neuron
it influences how the value of the
neuron changes we're dealing with
continuous time neural
networks what happens if for the I
neuron its particular sensor at a
particular point in time fires the value
of plus one how does that influence the
behavior of neuron I at that
moment any
ideas we've got we've just added plus
one to the right hand side of this
differential equation how is that sensor
value influencing the behavior of the ey
of
neuron does it make the rate go more
positive more more positive great right
it doesn't necessarily make it go
positive because the rate of change of
this neuron is also being influenced at
that moment in time by a whole bunch of
other things who knows what else is
going on maybe all the rest of this
stuff is setting the rate of change of
this neuron to be negative so it's the
neuron is poised to decrease in value
moving forward in time maybe this value
that's arriving is making its drop
slightly less it's making its rate of
change more positive not necessarily
positive but more
positive this neuron let's say it's
receiving an incoming sensory value of
minus one we're tacking at that point in
time a minus one onto the right hand
side of this differential equation it's
making the rate of change of this neuron
at that moment in time more negative not
necessarily negative but more negative
this will be the initial condition term
it's uh not necessarily the initial
conditions because we can take our six
neuron CNN drop it into a four
sensor uh robot and then at every point
in time that we simulate that robot and
we s integrate or compute the value of
these Odes of these differential
equations the values of the neuron the
values of the synapses are sorry the
values of the
sensors are influencing these four
neurons at every time step so it's not
necessarily initial conditions it's a
forcing term the the sensors out here
are continuously influencing the rate of
change of the
neurons sensors only influence
change correct the in in our cartoon
example down here the first and the
sixth neuron do not have any sensor
attached to them so the first and sixth
differential equation do not have this
term associated with them their behavior
is only influenced by all the other
neurons and then their own internal
parameters too G
Theta make sense okay again this term is
influencing a biological detail of neur
biological neurons which is the vast
majority of the neurons in you are
influenced only by other neurons there
is a vanishingly small fraction of
neurons in your body that are being
influenced by the outside world the
neurons right close to the back of your
eye are being more or less influenced by
incoming photons there's a little bit of
intermediate steps that are going on but
basically the firing rate of those
neurons very close to the back of your
eye are being influenced by the rate of
the rate of incoming photons same thing
with the neurons that are inside the
Clea inside the part of your inner ear
they're being influenced more or less by
the pressure waves that are coming from
my voice and so on
yeah okay all good okay how we doing for
time we got 20 minutes left okay so
that's a lot of theory what we're going
to do in the next 20 minutes is look at
an application of cnns we're going to
look at an application of CNN's not to
the minimal cognition experiments we're
going to look uh we're going to apply
them to a more complicated robot to see
why
ctrnn are more useful for evolving
intelligent Behavior than the simpler
less biologically realistic neural
networks that we've seen so far okay and
that'll finish off lecture eight this is
a bit of a complicated experiment so if
you don't get all the details that's
okay this is sort of mostly meant for
the grad students for the undergrads
follow along as best you can okay here
we go we're going to deal with this cute
little robot
here this Little Robot here as you can
see is going is uh as you can probably
guess is equipped with by with a CNN
there's a whole bunch of these
continuous time recurrent neurons inside
and this robot is being trained to try
and grasp and manipulate this small
block that's placed in front of
it here you can see the human teacher
helping this robot as this robot is
moving sensor information is is coming
from its hands and from it the camera in
its head those those sensor neurons
those sensor
values are flowing into the CNN that's
controlling this
robot and then some of the neurons
inside the ctrnn are sending values out
to the motors the one thing that we
haven't discussed yet about these cinns
we see how they receive values from
outside but how do they send values to
the outside we haven't really talked
about that but you can assume that
another subset of the neurons whatever
the value of that neuron is it just gets
sent
to a
motor remember that whenever we read out
a value from inside a neuron we squash
it with the activation function so we're
sending values that range between minus1
and + one we're sending that to the
motors of the
robot
okay we'll talk about this little figure
in the upper left in a
moment
okay I'm G to play this short clip again
you'll notice that the robot has evolved
the ability to lift this block up and
down a few times and then it's evolved
the ability to move this block left and
right a few times not a very
sophisticated set of behaviors but even
in this admittedly simple demonstration
this robot is showing a particular
Hallmark of intelligent Behavior which
is the ability to stitch together a
couple of simple motor behaviors in
sequence these are known as motor
Primitives you are all intelligent
machines when you learn a new Behavior
like learning to walk learning to run
learning to kick a ball learning to play
the piano learning to play the violin as
you learn more and more physical actions
you don't learn them from scratch that's
not a really good way to do things you
learn all the things that you can do in
a hierarchical manner you build up very
simple motor Primitives for walking this
is one motor primitive this is another
one once you learn them then you start
to put them together and you
get a bigger Behavior then you can start
to stitch those together walk then run
walk then jump over the hurdle then run
a bit jump over the hurdle run jump run
jump run jump we can keep stacking more
and more complex behaviors in a
hierarchical manner when you learn to
play a musical instrument of course you
don't learn an entire piece of music all
at once and then learn an ENT other
entire piece of music at once you learn
chords however that works depending on
the instrument you you learn different
chords then you learn how to stack them
together into phrases then you learn how
to stack phrases together it's a often
unsung building block of intelligence
it's so familiar and so obvious we don't
even realize that we're doing it if you
want to be intelligent here in the real
world and be able to flexibly do lots of
different complicated things like Walk
and Run and play the piano and play the
violin better to learn them and put them
together in a hierarchical manner okay
okay that makes sense how the heck do we
get a robot to do the same thing how do
we get it to learn to do different
things like lift a block up and down
three times and then shift a block left
and right three times without that robot
learning all of those behaviors from
scratch every
time why would it be bad for the robot
to just learn them from scratch every
time just a lot slower
three different movements that could be
repeated absolutely right so it's going
to take it a long time to do it let's
assume this robot has all the time in
the world time is not an issue compute
is not an issue this human teacher has
infinite patience even then there's a
disadvantage for the robot to learning
all of these simple behaviors from
scratch every time there's absolutely no
flexibility there's no flexibility right
hey robot but I want you to go like this
now right or go like this now or I want
you to do three times left and right
then up and down three times then
forward and back three times and repeat
that whole sequence 17 times it's got to
learn that whole thing from scratch
again not a good way to do that so in
this experiment what the investigators
tackled was how do we evolve all the
parameters for a ctrnn that controls
this robot so that it's able to learn
different motor Primitives one here's
another one and then after training be
able to stitch them together in new
combinations and
permutations okay here we go here's how
they did this okay here's the simplest
possible way to do this what you're
seeing in panel a down here hopefully
you can see this from the back is maybe
we create a CNN with one fully connected
subset of neurons we're going to to wire
up all of these neurons and these
neurons are going to be responsible for
up and down we're going to stitch
together these neurons we're going to
wire up all these neurons with synapses
but cut all of the synapses that connect
this group of neurons to this group of
neurons and make this neural module
responsible for uh this is responsible
for left and right this is responsible
for up and down wire up all of these cut
all of these connections and train or
evolve this CNN so that these neurons
control forward and back you might
remember back towards the beginning of
the semester we talked about the
subsumption architecture which is like
basically a set of stacked brenberg
vehicles and the brenberg vehicle that
keeps the robot from smashing itself to
Pieces is in charge most of the time if
the robot is not in danger of Smashing
itself to Pieces then it's free to turn
towards the dirtier part of the carpet
and turn away from the cleaner part of
the carpet where did we see this what is
this thing
called it's a it's a Roomba inside the
Roomba is the subsumption architecture
the Roomba is basically running a stack
it h it houses a stack of brenberg
vehicles and vehicle one two or three
can take control of the motors depending
on what the sensors are saying that's
one way to do things and works pretty
well if you're a Roomba and the only
particular motor primitive you ever need
to do
is
this and this it's okay but if there are
three or 10 or 100 or a thousand
different motor Primitives you need to
do and you need to stack and make more
three or 10 or 100 or a thousand
brenberg Vehicles doesn't scale very
well yeah is there one part of your
brain that's responsible for you playing
the violin and another for playing
soccer and another for playing soccer on
a rainy day and another one for playing
soccer on a sunny day another one for
playing on AstroTurf another one for
playing on natural grass not a very
scalable way to do things
so in this paper the investigators
create a CNN and I've just copied and
pasted the uh uh the differential
equation describing the behavior of an
individual neuron in a ctrnn over here
and they arranged things in the
following way they W they allowed all
the neurons to wire up to everybody else
but the
investigators um clamped the time
constants Evolution was play was was
free to Tinker with the weights the
gains and the fetas but the
investigators are going to set the time
constants themselves based on their own
intuition this is always difficult to do
but possible in this case what's the
intuition the intuition is visualized
down here we're going to set the time
constant for some of the neurons to be
Woody Allen neurons we're going to set
the time constants to be close to zero
so that these neurons can react and
change values very
quickly these fast neurons are going to
be connected to the motors
they set some they took some other
neurons in the ctrnn and set those to
have high time constants or high
magnitude time time constants to make a
set of eore neurons these neurons
respond very
slowly what's the intuition here why did
they do
this
absolutely so you can think of these
slow neurons as like the conductors of
an orchestra as you can see with this
slowly changing purple value this is
meant to represent the slowly changing
uh act activity of a slow neuron it's
like a conductor when the value of that
neuron is at intermediate value that
value of the slope neuron is influencing
all the other neurons through synapses
including the fast neurons and evolution
is going to try and tune all of those
synapses and gains and thetas so that
that intermediate value of the slow
neurons pushes the fast neurons into
this
pattern if the slow neurons slowly shift
to some other pattern that P that causes
a different influence on all the other
neurons including the fast neurons so
that they shift from doing this to doing
this make sense okay what particular uh
values of w and G and Theta will cause
all this to
happen who knows this is where we pass
things off to the evolutionary algorithm
we're not going to talk about the
fitness function I'll just give you sort
of a high level overview of how this
works
the fitness function is going to just
select the the fitness function is going
to try and tune all the Ws and G's and
thetas so that when these neurons
receive an outside value of one this
value is actually coming from the human
investigator the human investigator
plugs a a value of one into one of the
slow neurons from that neurons point of
view this just looks like a sensor value
right it suddenly just receives a value
of one which influences the behavior of
that slow neuron and when that slow
neuron gets a value of one the fast
neurons should cause the robot to do
this that's one part of the fitness
function if that neuron receives a value
of
two whatever it does it should cause the
fast ones to do this and same thing for
forward and back so far so good so in
theory if the evolutionary algorithm
Tunes all of the G's and W's and thetas
correctly the human investigator should
be able to play the Robot like an
instrument when the investigator presses
one the robot does this when the robot
presses two it does this and when the
investigator presses one again it goes
back to doing this and then the
investigator can take one step back and
send a series of values here one one one
1 2 1 1 3 3 1 2 two at a slow sequence
and that's in in essence the
investigator saying shake the block up
and down three times then push it
Forward back and forth three times and
so on we want to see how well the robot
does at being flexible somebody
mentioned flexibility send a new unseen
combination of requests for motor
Primitives and the robot should be able
to to do it so far so good good okay we
got four minutes left we should be able
to finish this
out I'm not going to talk about this
figure I invite the grad students to go
read the actual paper that are
interested in the details the only thing
I want you to take away from this
complicated picture here is that it's
basically a whole spaghetti mess we have
a whole bunch of neurons I think there
were uh I can't remember how many there
are there's a large number of neurons in
the ctrnn they're setting some of the
time constants to five which are the
fast neurons they're setting some of
them to slow I don't know how they got
the values of five and 70 but the
investigators are sending in the goal
they're telling the robot what it should
be doing at a high level shake the block
up and down three times back here in the
slow neurons so the conductor is
basically receiving a piece of music and
then the conductor is pushing the fast
neurons into different distinct
patterns
okay last figure we're going to look at
today this is what you're looking at
we're looking inside the brain of an
evolved ctrnn that's controlling the
robot so Evolution has tuned all the W's
and G's and thetas so that when the
investigator presses one when the
investigator presses three and so on
okay let's have a look at let's read
these off each individual panel here
each panel on the horizontal axis
corresponds to a few seconds of time in
the robot's experience we're not looking
at evolutionary time here we're looking
at a few
seconds in this particular panel here on
the vertical axis we're looking at
proprioception proprioception is a
particular uh type of Sensation that
records where your body is in space or
basically the angles of all of your
joints so is one two three four
different lines here I think these
correspond to the two elbows and the
four and the two shoulders of the robot
so we can see that the angles of the
robot's joints are oscillating three
times when it received the command to
shake the block up and down three times
doesn't necessarily mean that it's
actually going up and down three times
it's just doing something the robot is
repeating some motor primitive three
times when the robot receives a
different command shake the block left
and right there's a different pattern a
different oscillation three times this
is a visual sensation which we haven't
talked about this is the teaching signal
so this is the uh the teacher actually
holding the robot and shaking it in the
appropriate way and this is the robot
with its Motors trying to follow along
so each of these individual panels This
is the Rob this is the teacher saying
this is what you should feel this is the
teacher saying this is what you should
see and this is the robot saying this is
what I actually feel and this is the
robot saying this is what I actually see
myself
doing we've got one minute left okay
down here on the horizontal axis we
still have about five seconds of the
robot's experience each row in this
panel down here corresponds to one of
the neurons in the CTI andn within each
row a black pixel represents that that
uh neuron is firing with a big positive
value a value near plus one and a white
or gray pixel indicates that that neuron
is firing with a value that's near minus
one what's going on among all the fast
neurons
you can see that oscillation so if you
look in this part of the panel you can
see that the fast Woody Allen neurons
are oscillating three times and then
when they when the robot receives a
different teaching
signal the robots the the fast neurons
also start to oscillate back and forth
three times at some other different
pattern down here the these are the slow
neurons and if you look at the first
part of this lowermost panel you'll
notice that there is no little to no
oscillation the slow neurons over here
the conductors are holding constant some
particular set of activities and that's
pushing these fast neurons into an
oscillation back and forth three times
which you'll have to trust me
corresponds to the robot actually doing
what it was told to
do the neurons then re the slow neurons
then receive a different teaching signal
which pushes them into a different set
of patterns and there's a little bit of
an oscillation in the slow neurons but
essentially they start pushing the fast
neurons into a different fast
oscillation which again you'll have to
trust me corresponds to left and right
back and
forth okay we're out of time um if
there's any questions about this we'll
we'll feel those questions on Tuesday
you have a quiz due tonight undergrads
you're working on A5 grads you're
reaching the Finish Line with a n and 10
see you Tuesday
morning